Okay,
in
the interest of humility and knowledge, I'm
asking you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas
A&M oral history collection in the University
Archives. Is this okay with you?
The topic is going to be the 1960s counterculture
and the social movements at Colorado State
University. Please briefly describe your
education and your upbringing. Well, I was raised
Protestant fundamentalist in Colorado.
Attended school, mostly in religious school. Got
my bachelor's degree from Southern Nazarene
University.
And after that, I spent some time in the Army. And
after that, went back to school and got my master's
at Colorado College and my PhD at the University of
Illinois.
Okay.
I didn't really plan to do anything with it
vocationally until I got back out of the Army and
then discovered I could get a PhD. And if I did that,
I could teach at the college level. And so that made
it possible for the first time to make a living
doing philosophy. What was so interesting about
philosophy to you? Oh, I think the traditional
things that interest people in philosophy.
meaning of life? Why are we here? Those are the
kinds of questions that got me interested in
philosophy. Okay. Which, of course, are the
questions philosophy cannot answer, but I didn't
know that then. Right. When and where did you teach
during the 1960s?
Well, 1956 to 50,
I went from 57 to 67. I taught at Colorado State
University. And then from 67 on here at Texas A&M.
What influenced your decisions to become a
teacher?
I think I always like to share ideas.
But what I got and I came to like about it was the fact
that you can see people share these ideas and
appreciate these ideas. I guess what motivates
you to teach is the fact that some people seem to
learn something.
Okay, this is where we get to the good stuff. What
was the attitude and the spirit of the students
when you began teaching, and did you witness a
change as the decade of the 60s progressed? Yeah,
in the late 50s. That's when I was a student and when
I first started teaching. This was a very fearful
period. This is a period of McCarthyism, and I
think people today don't really understand how
strong that influence was. because even as late as
57 at Colorado College, which was a private
school, there was a McCarthy Club, students and
faculty. And it was well known that they monitored
the teaching and the comments of other people. And
this was also the period of loyalty oaths, that in
order to get a teaching job, you had
in the Constitution of the United States. So it was
a period in the late 50s when people were so afraid
of communism that this allowed people like
McCarthy and others to dominate the intellectual
life of this country. And people literally would
not say or publish certain things because they
were afraid they might get investigated. And it
wasn't just being communist. If you were a member
of the American Civil Liberties Union, it was
something considered to be beyond the pale.
During that period of time, an attitude which
George Bush has revived.
It was anti-paternalism was really how it started
out. These kids didn't like what their parents
were doing. They didn't like the way their parents
lived. They didn't like their parents' focus on
making money. They thought there should be
something more important in life than fighting
communism and making money. They didn't know what
it was, and so what they turned to was,
folk music, drugs,
turning off, Tim Leary said, turning off, turning
on, doing your own thing. Community living was big
then. Groups of students would live together in
old houses and share their food, share their
belongings.
out with some new values, knowing that the old
values were bad, but they had no clear idea
whatsoever what they were going to replace the old
values with. They were anti-system,
anti-establishment. They knew that was bad. They
didn't know what was good. They didn't know how to
replace it. That, I think, characterized the 60s.
Now, some people took political advantage of
this, and there were some movements organized And
I think the leaders of these movements, like the
Students for Democratic Society, maybe they had a
particular agenda. But I think most of the people
that followed these various movements were
simply drifting around, looking for something
better. Peace and love and so on. And during this
period, I had the reputation on campus of being a
conservative at Colorado State University.
Because I would argue with these kids, and I would
say, all right, now, what is it you want? Be
positive. You say, this is bad. Don't you have an
obligation?
was too clear. Then, of course, also during that
period, this all got caught up in the anti-Vietnam
War, too. They were against the war in Vietnam. And
I think that movement, that group of young people
who just didn't like what was going on, they were
there to be used and directed by any number of
people. But generally, they were quickly
disillusioned by the people who were using them
and directing them. These people never went far
enough as far as the young people were concerned.
And in a way, it was sad because there was a lot of
idealism
And there wasn't any leadership. There wasn't
anybody to direct it in any positive direction.
See, and all you could tell them was something
like, well, stay within the system. Work within
it. Try to change it from within. And they would
have no part of that. They weren't interested in
doing that because they figured if you worked
within the system, you simply got corrupted by the
system. And they may have been right about that.
But they weren't willing to destroy the system.
They didn't have...
really proved. Then this movement stopped
because nobody really wanted to get shot. And so it
was repressed by the government eventually. Did
some of the classes you teach reflect your
attitudes and views or the views of the 60s?
No, I didn't go in for relevant classes, although I
always taught existentialism. And a lot of these
people thought they were existentialists. They
claimed an affinity with existentialism. And I
try to point out to them, well, they really weren't
existentialists. They were just half-baked
existentialists. They wanted to do their own
thing. But existentialism always says, if you do
your own thing, you must assume responsibility
for it. They didn't want to do that. They didn't
want to assume any responsibility for their
actions, no matter what their actions were. They
were parasites in a way. They wanted the freedom to
use the society to have, you know, do drugs,
dissent, rebel. But they wanted society always
there to be to catch them if they fell or if they made
a mistake. So that's why I say it was
anti-paternalism. Most of this movement was
getting even with mom and dad and yet hoping that
mom and dad would be there to pick up the pieces if
things got out of hand. You always know they'll be
there if you need them. I think they really always
counted on that, you see. And for the most part,
that's what happened. The parents were there and
picked them up. And I think most of the parents were
supportive, ultimately supportive.
So when people talked about it as being a great
political revolution or a Sexual revolution or
drug revolution. I think those were side issues.
Those were symptoms. They would engage in certain
activity, mainly because it irritated their
parents. And what activity would they select?
What will irritate your parents? I remember
talking to a young girl I had in class. I still know
her. We're still friends. But she was a very
attractive girl, except she didn't care for her
parents. She'd wear old clothes and Her hair was
never combed and she looked dirty and so on. And I
asked her one day, I said, you know, why the devil
don't you clean up?
I said, why do you dress like that? She said, well,
because, because of my parents. And I said, why?
She said, well, they always want me to be neat and
clean. And I said, so you're not going to be neat and
clean because your parents want you to be. Yeah,
that's right. That's right. So, you know, it's a
way of trying to shock her parents. But she still,
you know, she never really left her parents. They
never really left her. This was a,
it was almost a bloodless revolution.
I mean, and I think displaying
in some ways because it never really accomplished
a great deal.
Most of what happened was bad. You got some people
who got really hooked on bad drugs. You got some
people
who really lost their purpose in life, became
drifters.
Oh, some good music came out.
But it was strictly a made-in-the-USA kind of
rebellion. safely within limits and boundaries,
I think, never really got out of hand. And I think
the government overreacted
by starting to shoot people. And that's why, if
these people had been serious, they would have
shot back. But they weren't. It was just kind of
like, oh,
Some of the classes you taught, were there
guidelines? Were you able to set your own goals or
guidelines for your classes, or was the
administration really strict on what you were
allowed to teach and how you were supposed to teach
it? You know, after the 50s were over, we got rid of
McCarthyism. You had a great deal of freedom in the
classroom because during the 60s, You had
teach-ins, big thing. You had a lot of professors
using the classroom to support the students, to
support various causes, all of which I thought was
bad. I thought that was a misuse of the classroom.
But you had the counterpart of that was you had, in
many places, students taking over classrooms,
trying to take over universities. And that's what
upset me. I think that's finally what upset the
academic world, was that students weren't
playing the game anymore. We'll let you have our
classroom. We'll talk about these issues. But
when you try to run the university, no, we won't let
you do that.
And did you encourage them to be active and offer
advice? Well, yes, I did. I did. It depends what you
mean. Encourage them to be active. I try to keep
from hurting themselves.
I tried to get them to avoid excesses if I could. And
in fact, one time, I can't remember the exact
years, but there was a period where students were
experimenting with LSD. They were getting it from
certain varieties of morning glory seeds, which
contained it naturally. Lysergic acid contained
it naturally. But they didn't know how to use it.
They didn't know how to get it from the morning
glory seeds, how to use it. They didn't know what
precautions to take. And this was a time where LSD
was a recreational drug. It was almost like
whiskey. I mean, professors, students were using
it. People were spending the weekend. putting
drops of LSD on sugar cubes, dripping them down,
and having trips. And so you'd get some kids that,
to use the language of that day, kids that would
really freak out, I mean. And we began to learn some
things about drugs. Learned one, that you could
set the mood by setting the stage. In other words,
if a person prepared themself, by reading certain
things, talking about certain things, then they
would have a certain kind of drug experience. But
that drug experience wasn't very stable, that you
needed to have somebody around that kept it within
bounds by talking to them holding their hand and so
on. People shouldn't use drugs on their own. We
learned that because people would jump out of
windows and kill themselves. We learned also that
If people had any psychotic tendencies at all, and
they might not be obvious on the surface, the drugs
would bring it out, especially LSD would bring it
out. And so people would just sometimes go
permanently around the bend because of the LSD
when they might have lived a normal life without
using the LSD. So people fairly quickly got scared
of LSD because of so-called bad trips. But during
that period of experimentation, I remember...
typing up and reproducing a little one-page
instruction on how to use morning glory seeds so
that the kids would not have bad trips, see? And
these instructions were printed later in the
college newspaper. You know, imagine the
battalion doing this. And kids would recount
their trips, their acid trips. They'd write them
up in paper. I mean, this was all open. I mean,
nobody was saying, this is bad stuff. People were
saying, well, keep it under control. It's totally
different from the day with the gist, they know.
Oh, yeah. It really was a period of, as I say,
experimentation. And I had kids come to class and
light up a joint marijuana, and I finally made them
stop that. I just said, no, you don't know.
And so I think the students' graduate award in LSD
was bad. And I remember having in class debates
about marijuana. And you'd have some students
say, oh, it's all right, and other students say,
no, it's bad. And this was not on moral grounds at
all. I mean, these are kids who tried it and said,
you know, all the time I was on it, I didn't care
about anything. You just don't care.
You know, you don't do any harm, particularly. You
don't go out and kill people, but you just don't
care about anything. You're passing. And we have
arguments like this. But in this pamphlet, I start
to tell you about, you know, the seeds, the morning
glory seeds, certain varieties had LSD in them, or
resurgic acid in them.
So first you had to wash the seeds carefully. Then
you had to grind them up. Because some kids would
take a handful of seeds, nothing would happen.
They'd take another handful and nothing would
happen. And then all of a sudden, finally, the
seeds were being broken down by their digestive
juices and they'd get hit with these massive doses
of seed. So what you had to do was grind it up so that
you'd get the effect quickly. And then the right
amount have a friend there and, you know, do all
this because it's necessary to have at least two
people around. I thought with LSD, because you
might hurt yourself just thinking you could walk
into a mirror or all kinds of stupid things. I never
used any of the drugs myself during that period.
And, but I did try, I guess that's just,
political side of it, too. You hated to see him get
shot. You hated to see him confront the police
because you knew, ultimately, what the attitude
or authority was going to be. And these things came
to a head, I think, with Kent State and the
Democratic Convention in Chicago. Basically,
the grown-ups said, this is enough. If we have to,
we'll shoot you.
Did you encourage debates in your class regarding
student rights, women's rights, civil rights in
the Vietnam War? Yeah, sure did. We talked a lot
about student rights. And we had quite a few
debates about the war. This was common during that
period.
I was generally a person, if they had a debate, I
generally argued for who were in Vietnam. And the
reason for that was is that they were all against
it. They didn't think about the other side of the
issue at all. And I think if I had been in Korean War,
and I think if I had been of age, I would have gone to
Vietnam. I would have thought that's my job.
But they didn't think that way.
about women's rights. Civil rights is already
past, you know, it's getting going. Well, women's
rights came very late. It's a funny thing. See,
these people didn't care about women's rights.
The kids in the 60s used women. And these communes
that have, there's usually one woman who did all
the work. She cooked all the food. She took care of
everybody. And that's what held the thing
together. And if she quit, if she got tired of doing
this, you know, she was the earth mother figure. If
she quit doing this, the thing would fall apart.
But these kids used one. Women weren't considered
to be equal in the 60s. That movement didn't have
anything to do with women's rights. Now, it tried
to latch up with the racial movement. It tried to.
But I think most of them admitted afterward they
really didn't care about that issue either. That
was just something to do. It was a cause. See, these
were people looking for something to do,
something to give their life meaning, right? And
whatever,
you know, whatever they could latch up to would
work, but women's rights was not one of the things
they got up to. They got into civil rights
movement, anti-war movement, pro-drug
movement, you know, sex, pre-sex. Pre-sex was a
big issue. And freedom of speech was a big issue,
which meant, you know, Really, what that meant at
that time was that you could say, fuck, without
getting in trouble. That was the free speech
issue. You might have said that you did some
participation with your students taking the
counter side to what they talked about. How did
your administration view your participation?
Well, I think the students thought I was a
conservative, and the administration thought I
was a communist. kind of stuck in the middle. Yeah,
because as long as you were doing anything with
this student movement, then the administration
didn't like it.
But the students, and some of them told me
afterwards, they said, you know, you were the guy
we had to test our ideas against.
We had some ideas that we thought were really
liberal
They were just nervous. They were nervous. They
were afraid the students were going to take over
the university. They were going to be destructive
and so on and so forth. And they didn't really
understand what the root causes were. And they
could have used this. They could have used this
whole movement as a great educational
opportunity. But they didn't. They just wanted to
shut it down. How could they have used it as an
interesting point? Well, these students weren't
with these issues. Now, a lot of teachers did this,
but they did it independent of the
administration. I mean, if you said, okay, we're
going to have a teach-in about student rise or
about war, you had to do this on your own. The
administration didn't like it particularly. And
this is why, you see, this is why ultimately in
It's because they thought the administration was
beginning to say certain things cannot be done for
educational purposes. This kind of discussion,
we don't want it. So then the students got more
militant. They said, well, we'll just take over
the classroom. Or if there would be a professor who
would be in his classroom and attack them, they
might go after him. Now, I attacked them in my
class.
to be fearful objects at all. I just thought they
were misguided. There was a lot of good stuff. I
mean, there was a lot of this youthful idealism.
But we never took advantage of it, you see. And it
was Kennedy saw something here, you see. Kennedy
tried to channel it with the Peace Corps, you see.
And that helped some. and helped siphon off some of
it, the constructive part of it, you see. More of
that should have been done.
But of course, you see, Kennedy didn't last long
enough. And this was disillusioning. I think if
Kennedy had remained president and been elected
for second term, as I think he would have been, I
think maybe all of this energy would have been
channeled off in a useful direction. But
Kennedy's shot, so what do you think? Why did they
shoot him? Well, they shot him because he was on our
side, you know. And then who comes in? A guy who just
loved to antagonize the students.
And Dixon says, they did when I do this. They did.
Were you pressured to publish? And what kind of
materials did you publish in the 60s?
more than anybody else was. I mean, in the academic
world, if you want to get ahead, you have to . So
everybody's pressured. But there wasn't any
particular new or novel kind of pressure in the
60s. Nor was there any pressure to do anything in
any particular way or direction.
It was unusual. Mostly it was just philosophical
stuff, kind of independent of that
era. So much is made of the drug culture in the
1960s, and you've already stated that you
witnessed a lot of this. Do you agree with the
assumptions that it increased and expanded the
power of the mind with the use of drugs?
I mean, to say that these drugs were consciousness
expanding is certain and true because people
would have experiences and see things that you
normally don't see, okay? I remember one student
coming into my office one day and he was all bloody.
Scratched up, clothed and torn and big smile on his
face and I said, what have you been doing? He said, I
had a wonderful trip. He said, I took this LSD He
said, it came to me that if I could walk to the top of
Horsetooth Mountain, that was a mountain near the
university, that's probably 15 miles to the top
from the university. He said, if I could walk to the
top of that mountain in a straight line, without
stopping for anything, he said, the second coming
would occur. He said, I knew that.
line. He never made it to the top, but he got to the
point where he was exhausted and fell asleep. Then
he came back down. He was sober now. He's over his
drug experience. He really believed that. Well,
that's a novel kind of experience. You don't
normally believe those kinds of things.
That's why a lot of people use them.
to have. I don't think so. I think generally not.
Some of them were very benign experiences. If you
properly conditioned yourself, if you read a lot
of Buddhist stuff, then you take LSD and people
tell me you had a Buddhist experience. That was
very pleasant to see. But it didn't last any
longer. The drug influence, the drug lasted. And
there was always a possibility of doing permanent
damage to your brain. So, no, I just don't think it
was a good idea. Now, I don't agree, never have
agreed, though, with the government's attitude
that every drug from marijuana up in any amount,
from the amount on the head for paying up, should
put somebody in prison. I don't agree with that.
There were a lot of people who used LSD in the 60s who
never suffered any harmful effects. They used it,
they tried it, they quit it.
There's a lot of people still using marijuana
today. And it seemed to me the drugs of today, the
drugs of the 90s and the 80s, like cocaine and
crack, are much more deadly, much more deadly than
LSD and marijuana and things they had in those
days.
So the fact that the government cracked down and
tried to control us hasn't accomplished
anything. It hasn't done any good. And I think
maybe we ought to try decriminalizing some of the
drugs.
Cocaine, no, I don't think you ought to
decriminalize it. I think marijuana is not
helpful to people, but I don't think alcohol
is either. In fact, I think alcohol is more harmful
than marijuana. And I think this is something
people have got to make up their own minds about.
So, you know, to answer your question, I don't
think the drugs did anybody any good. I think
everybody ought to leave them alone. But I think
that about cigarettes too.
I think nowadays
the drug problem is they're trying to get a state of
euphoria out of it and a great feeling I think maybe
in the 60s they used it to see if they could find
something else in their mind or something else
that they're just... Well, a lot of them did. A lot
of people used it because they thought this would
give them a meaning and purpose in life and so on.
Yeah. But there were those who did it for the
euphoria too.
If you smoke anything, we know now if you smoke
something, whether it's crack or cigarettes, it
gets into the brain stream very quickly. If you
inject it in your veins, it gets into your blood
system quickly, but not as quickly as if you smoke
it. And if you eat it, it takes longer to get into the
nervous system. Now, we also know that addictions
of drugs that you smoke are the hardest ones to
overcome. The needle stuff is the second hardest,
and ingestion by mouth is the easiest to overcome.
The quicker it hits your bloodstream, the more
addictive it becomes.
Each three types of addiction require different
treatment, and each three types of addiction are
types of addiction adopted by people with
different personalities. I think in the 60s, you
had a lot of...
What's the drug you make cookies out of? Hashish is
one. You had a lot of people eating drugs in the 60s
and swallowing drugs by mouth. And most of those
people could quit. I did quit while I did quit. Now,
where was the crack? And the reason it's being
marketed is just for money. The people who supply
drugs developed crack. They sat down and planned
this. Crack, oh boy, this will get them quick. And
this will hook them forever. And you smoke it,
especially. And you've got them. So that's a whole
different approach to drugs. And The government
attempts to take care of the drug problem. We're
not affecting the 60s, and they're not affecting
them. I'm not sure what the answer is. With people
with crack cocaine, I don't know what the answer
is. We may have to adopt the Chinese answer.
They gave them six months to get off, and then they
shot them. That's right.
I hate to advocate that, but I don't know that there
is a cure.
And it's a terribly hard addiction to overcome, I
understand.
But to blame all that on the 60s is ridiculous.
Yeah.
The 1960s was a time of tremendous change. Were
these changes... Did you witness these changes on
your campus and do you believe they were
inevitable? Well, we saw changes. Let's just talk
about the so-called sexual revolution.
What happened in the 60s was that people of college
age began sleeping with each other without the
benefit of matrimony.
Much to the consternation of their parents. And
the school authorities, for the most part. And
that was a change. I don't think it was inevitable.
I think the rebellion against parents was
probably inevitable. The 50s were so darn
repressive. that the kids had to rebel at some
point. Now, what form that rebellion took, I guess
maybe it had to be a sexual form of some kind. Maybe
it had to be a drug. I don't think so. I think that
rebellion could have taken other forms. But it's
just hard for me to think that
But that had to happen in any sense of
inevitability. I don't think so. I think if
parents had been a little smarter, if the
government had been a little smarter, we wouldn't
be sitting here talking about the 60s today.
Colorado has like a reputation of having three
spirits. DC, Boulder, and Colorado State. Was
this evident in the 60s and just continued on until
today? Well, I didn't know it at the time, but yes,
you look back and you have to say that Colorado
State and Boulder were one of the wilder places in
the university scene, because we didn't know that
then, like the students knew it then. It just
turned out that way. And I've often wondered why
that's the case.
of states. So you had a kind of cross-section of
America. I mean, they weren't just Colorado kids.
There aren't that many Colorado kids. You're kind
of in a backwater. You're in the middle of the
nation and you're not strongly influenced by what
goes on on either coast. So you're kind of free.
Free from scrutiny. Free to develop on your own.
And so nobody was...
When they weren't doing the things that they were
doing in Columbia, they were burning buildings
around it. Oh, they did burn one building in CSU. I
think it was an ROTC building. But they weren't
being destructive in the same way. But also, being
in Colorado, there's greater toleration of
individualism. Now, you compare that with Texas
A&M. See, I came down to Texas A&M in 67, and I
thought the 60s were practically over. Well, we
got a little bit of the 60s here, but we got it in the
late 60s and early 70s. I mean, we had three people
join the SDS here, and we had some marijuana in the
dorms, and we had some drugs, and we had a little
unrest. Maybe we had one demonstration against
Vietnam, but it was so mild. I mean...
Texas A&M was in the backwater too, but because it
was in the cultural backwater, it wasn't
influenced by these things. But Colorado was
influenced because most of the students here were
from Texas, but most of the students there were
from all over the country. So they brought in these
ideas from all over the country and mixed them up
there. Then you had some people who didn't know
what to do about it. I guess it did turn out to be an
interesting place. Now, Colorado College could
turn repressive. I taught there one year, and what
they did at Colorado College is that they expelled
any student found using drugs. Well, at Colorado
State, we thought that was terrible. Because, as I
said, there's still people using drugs for
writing about it in the school newspaper. It was
just like, you know, I'm trying this new idea, you
know.
I don't know why it was that permissive then,
compared to other places.
When you came to Texas A&M in 1967, was it, I can't
remember when the court was forced to allow it. 64.
64. Yeah, this is a few years afterward. But still,
most of the students here were male in the court
when I came. And you said you witnessed one, or knew
of one, demonstration against Vietnam. Mm-hmm.
What was the Corps' reaction to that? Well, the
Corps all gathered around these five or six people
who were demonstrating and had to be, who had to be
protected by the campus police. Happened right
out here in front of Sully Ross, the academic
building.
But the campus police just gathered around and let
these five or six kids demonstrate for 20 minutes,
and then that was it. This is the way to handle it, I
think. I mean, that's all there were, five or six
kids, and most of them were from somewhere else, I
think. There just wasn't any strong anti-war
sentiment here, or hippie element here. Plowed
children,
no, not at A&M, no. Did you ever go to visit other
campuses like Berkeley or Columbia during the
60s? What did you visit there?
They were pretty wild, too. I'd go give talks at the
California universities during that period. And
the students would come into the building, and
they would be dressed or undressed in all kinds of
weird ways. That was one characteristic. And they
would sit in the windows or on the floors, and
they'd have their guitars with them. And it was
kind of like, you know, we're going to have a nanny.
And you either talk their language and
communicate with them fairly quickly or you lost
them. It was all superficially very free and easy.
Superficially, that way. But these kids weren't
free and easy inside. That was the sad part. They
were looking for something and never did find it. A
lot of movies have been made about this. Like The
Big Chill. I don't know what, you know, about how
people reflecting back on their experience. I
think they're quite right when they reflect back
and say, you know, what turns out to be finally nice
about it is that we were close together and we felt
friendly toward each other. The communal
experience was about the only thing that lasted.
Made some friends. They all had to get jobs
sometimes and they had to become part of the
system. And most of them did a very good job at it.
You know, it's interesting. Look at
Tom Hayden. And who else was I thinking
of? Well, Hayden's a good example of a radical...
Mark Lee was in philosophy. Angela Davis was a
woman who taught philosophy. A lot of these
so-called radicals, leaders, were from
philosophy, which is what you'd expect,
actually, to think about these things. But the
people that followed them, as I said, didn't
really. Outside of being friends and having a
warm, friendly experience, You know, it didn't
make a permanent effect on this country at all.
I could be wrong. I mean, in a sense, some things
happen. We can't go back. We can't go back to the 50s
again. That's one good thing the 60s did for us. We
can't go back to McCarthy again. I don't think. But
see, I don't know. I see people who want to.
and Jesse Helms and so on remind me of McCarthy a
great deal.
But they're not enforcing loyalty and they're not
punishing people yet. And I hope that doesn't
happen again. So maybe the
This concludes the
interview with Dr. Manuel Davenport.